# Cognitive Orgies 3 {: .master-title}

## Personal Reflection

Nature exploitation has arguably its roots in a dualistic view of humans and nature. When land became an object, it was easy to exploit it. But before land became resource and property, humans had first to be severed from it. How can we end this fundamental separation of humans from the land itself? I was conceptually fascinated by this indigenous notion of the body as landscape: Our bodies are part of the land. And the land is our extended body. In my background as a sustainability researcher I have engaged with this critical thinking before but I wanted to take it to an immersive experience because I believe healing the fragmentation of the self from the land is not just a rational but an affective and bodily process. So I was lucky Erandi resonated with this interest and we got to work to create an installation that would let you experience how our bodies are an extension of the landscape. We did this by designing two layers: the first strategy was to depict this interconnected by creating an extended landscape skin: A mesh and plaster sculpture inspired on the terrain of mountains and rivers, and a second bioplastic skin for people that they can wrap around their bodies, which had earth pigments such as clay. This layer of connection was aesthetic. The plaster sculpture was a kind of projection surface, so we displayed videos of vulnerable landscapes onto it. The bioplastic skin was semi-translucent, you could see the redish-brown dyes painted into the bioplastic, and you could see your own skin through the transparent areas. 

Physically, they were separate skins, but they were both connected through an electronic system. That was the second strategy: to map zones of the mesh sculpture to zones of the bioplastic skin, the connection was activated by the act of touch. When people touch parts of the mesh sculpture (the landscape bodies of deforested rainforests, monocultures, etc), they felt a haptic vibration on their bodies. This part was making people in awe and curious. Here we also wanted to include an additional interaction: when people touch the landscape they would see it changing into a healthier state, but that required more time in touch designer, something to explore later. 

In general, we were very happy with the result of the interaction, it had some glitches sometimes but maybe that was due to the connection through wifi of both ESP32S3, one connected to the mesh and the other to the skin. Having this working smoothly would be also another goal of a future iteration. 
