# Cognitive Orgies 2 {: .master-title}

## Personal Reflection

I think PollinOasis conceptually was quite strong: to design microhabitats for pollinators that worked as climate refuge and also as feeding spots. These habitats we meant to be easily distributed in the city and attach to light poles. We had to overall strategies, one material: creating this habitats with 3D printed recycled cork (a recipe I got from another IAAC workshop), and one electronic:  an embedded electronic system that would count bee interaction with the structure and this way could tell us more about bee food preference or preference for different versions of this artificial habitat. I really liked that the concept was a habitat and at the same time a research tool. We even had a layer of interaction with humans through sound, where every time a bee was feeding on the structure, a buzzer would amplify the sound of the bee so that humans passing by could listen to it. This had an artistic layer to it, since the silence of bees is the result of bee declining population making it louder is kind of a celebration of the comeback of bees. 

However, we faced many technical difficulties, the biggest two were: 1. finding the right shape for the structure 2. finding the method to fabricate with the materiality we chose: recycled cork. The first one was more a topic that Ludovico was overseeing, I do not use Rhino so I could help little here, my only contribution was to look for physical references of 3D printed objects in IAAC, and in the end it actually helped, we found a simple structure made by multiple layers that were all the same shape, a kind of flower shape, just rotated by 90 degrees.  Every layer that was built on top of the other creating “natural” pockets where we could place the soil and friendly-pollinator plants. 

The second challenge was harder to solve: printing the recycled cork in the smaller hacked 3D printer was not how I imagined, I had done this printing in a different machine, the big robotic arm of IAAC, and scaling it down was a mess. The recipe for the ingredients had to change and I lost a lot of time trying to get the right spot of liquid-solid state of the mix. Even we managed this, the printer would unevenly push the material and when we finally had a small prototype,  the nozzle started to go down the z-axis and crushed part of the artifact, panicking we tried to lift it back up with the software but probably pressed the wrong direction and the printer dragged the nozzle all the way through the x-axis, destroying almost all of the object that we had developed. After this, I wanted to do the printing manually, meaning using the pump to push the material, but using my hand to shape the form into a wood plate. In order words, I gave up trying to use the small 3D printer and went to want to use my own hand to draw it, at least to show something. We ended up doing just that, and we only manage to get many 10 layers of the material, but at least it was communicating the shape of the habitat. The full tall version was shown in a plastic 3D print which we use to also show how the electronics were working. So overall, I think conceptually this project has a lot of potential, but on the technical side, we need to figure out how to do the fabrication on the real scale with a proper hardware or find a low-tech version of sculpting this shape. 
